---
publish: true
tags:
  - 免疫
  - 病理
---

**Diseases of Lymphatic and Hematopoietic system**
组织学结构

| 淋巴样组织 Lymphoid tissue                                                | 髓样组织 Myeloid tissue                                                                                                |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Lymph nodes 淋巴结                                                      | Bone marrow 骨髓                                                                                                     |
| Spleen 脾脏<br>Thymus 胸腺                                               | non-nucleated erythrocytes and platelets,<br>megakaryocytes<br>nucleated cells or leukocytes <br>血液中细胞成分（WBC, RBC） |
| extranodal lymphoid tissue<br>(tonsil, Peyer patches, etc)<br>结外淋巴组织 |                                                                                                                    |
结节/肿大：1）炎症；2）肿瘤
淋巴细胞发育及其标记的CD抗体系列 ；TdT(terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase) 末端脱氧核苷酸转移酶
[](17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401.pdf#page=6&selection=0,0,2,4|17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401,%20页面%206)

# Lymphadenopathy 淋巴结病（良性增生）

==Lymph nodes==
- The **cortex(皮质)**, contains nodules of **B-lymphocytes** either as **primary follicles （滤泡）** or as **germinal centres（生发中心）**
- The **paracortex（皮质旁区） or deep cortex**, the **T-cell- dependent region** of the lymph node
- The **medulla（髓质）**, containing the medullary cords (**髓索**)and sinuses（**髓窦**） which drain into the hilum.

---
### Non-neoplastic lymphadenopathy 非肿瘤性淋巴结肿大
The major cellular reaction include: 主要表现为：
1. ==B-cell response== with **germinal center hyperplasia 生发中心增生** associated with **marginal zone hyperplasia** 
2. ==T-cell response== with **paracortical expansion（副皮质区淋巴增生）**
3. ==macrophage response== associated with **sinus hyperplasia（窦组织细胞增生)**
---
### Non-specific reactive hyperplasia 非特异性反应性增生
- **Numerous enlarged germinal centres**生发中心增大（不局限于皮质区；整个淋巴结）
	- throughout the node and not restricted to the outer cortex as in the normal state.
	- **active germinal centres**, a predominance of large blast cells+ a high mitotic rate, +numerous **tingible body(可染小体) macrophages**. 生发中心激活状态；可染小体--巨噬细胞吞噬碎片
- **An expanded marginal zone : a thick rim around the germinal centre.**
- The paracortex usually shows some degree of hyperplasia characterized by the presence of transformed, large lymphoid cells and vessels lined by large endothelial cells (high endothelial venules*高内皮小静脉*).
- The sinuses often show hyperplasia of the lining macrophages, termed **sinus histiocytosis窦组织细胞增生.**

病毒感染：主要为皮质T细胞区；常常为混合型
-  non-specific reactive hyperplasia
	- Non-specific reactive hyperplasia may occur in lymph nodes *draining sites of infection.*  引流
	- In some cases, pathogenic organisms may cause inflammatory changes and progress to *abscess* formation.—acute non- specific lymphadenitis 急性期--脓肿
---
### Specific disorders 特异性
- *Granulomatous* lymphadenitis Can occur in a variety of clinical settings, e.g., mycobacterial infection-tubercles(结核结节)
- *Necrotizing* lymphadenitis（自限性疾病）
	1. Kikuchi’s disease（菊池病） 组织细胞坏死性淋巴结炎
	2. Cat scratch disease（猫抓病）
	3. Infectious mononucleosis(传染性单核细胞增多症)
---
###### Kikuchi's disease（菊池病）：组织细胞坏死性淋巴结炎
- Infection of human herpes virus-type 6 **(HHV-6 virus)**
- Fever, Tender cervical lymphadenopathy develops, most commonly in young adult women.好发于年轻女性
- Coagulative necrosis in paracortex area, surrounded by proliferating macrophages and T cells. 副皮质区凝固性坏死
- Self-limited （1-3months）
###### Cat scratch disease（猫抓病）
- Follows a bite or scratch from an *infected cat*. **Bartonella henselae （ 汉塞巴尔通体） (75%）**感染
	- Formation of stellate abscesses within the lymph node, surrounded by *palisaded（栅栏状） histiocytes.*
- Days to weeks later, tender lymphadenopathy develops in the cervical or axillary regions; the groin（腹股沟） is less commonly affected. 好发于颈部、腋下，腹股沟少累及
- Fatigue Fever Chills
- Nausea and Vomiting, Headache
###### Infectious mononucleosis(传染性单核细胞增多症)
- Infection of **EB virus**
- Fever, cervical, axillary regions; the groin腹股沟 lymphadenopathy develops, most commonly in **adolescent青少年.**
- hyperproliferation of lymphocytes in paracortex area, sometime *similar as RS cells*.
- Self-limited （4-6 weeks）

# ⭐Lymphoma 淋巴瘤

- 所有均为恶性！
- Malignancies of the immune system (Hodgkin's lymphoma and the non-Hodgkin's lymphomas)
- 诊断困难；亚型繁多且难以区分
- **分期**：Ann arbor staging system [](17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401.pdf#page=24&selection=0,0,0,35|17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401,%20页面%2024)
	- Ⅳ期：累及多个结外淋巴结；还有远处淋巴结受累（播散表现）

## HL(Hodgkin lymphoma霍奇金淋巴瘤), 15-20%

- 诊断标准：
> Reed-Sternberg(R-S) cell
[](17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401.pdf#page=25&selection=15,0,15,24|17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401,%20页面%2025)
肿瘤细胞大细胞（15-20μm）；核大，明显核仁，核仁有RBC大小

#### Clinical features
- A special entity of lymphoma and occupies up to 20% of all lymphomas
- Young adults (Age: 15-27 most) are more commonly involved, and around 50 are more involved
- **Painless** enlargement of the lymph nodes
- The tumor arises in a single node or chain of nodes spreads to the **anatomically contiguous nodes**
- Extranodal involvement is rare
#### Subtypes

| cHL 经典型霍奇金淋巴瘤                    | NLPHL 结节性淋巴细胞为主型霍奇金淋巴瘤 |
| -------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| Nodular sclerosis, NS (结节硬化型)    |                        |
| Lymphocyte rich, LR (淋巴细胞为主型)    |                        |
| Mixed cellularity, MC (混合细胞型)    |                        |
| Lymphocyte deplete, LD (淋巴细胞消减型) |                        |

###### Classical Hodgkin lymphoma, cHL (经典型霍奇金淋巴瘤)
**Clinical features**
- The commonest clinical presentation is one of lymphadenopathy, most often in the upper half of the body, with involvement of cervical and/or axillary lymph nodes.
- cHL appears to arise in lymph nodes or the thymus, and spreads via the lymphatics in a *contiguous and predictable fashion*（可预测的方式）
- The enlarged nodes are typically rubbery（坚韧的）, discrete and mobile and may achieve a *considerable size-massive*, causing respiratory embarrassment（呼吸窘迫）.
- A third of patients with Hodgkin‘s lymphoma have systemic symptoms全身症状 (weight loss greater than 10%, unexplained pyrexia of 39°C or more, and drenching night sweats)
- Haematological and biochemical abnormalities such as anemia, lymphocytopenia （淋巴细胞减少症）, a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR血沉) and a low serum albumin. These abnormalities are also indicators of a reduced survival.
**Morphology Macroscopic**
- Lymph nodes are enlarged, with a smooth surface
- Rarely breaches the lymph node capsule. 
- The cut surface is usually homogeneously white.
- In some histological subtypes a nodular or fibrotic appearance may be present.
**Microscopy**
- Affected lymph nodes show a partial or complete effacement of their normal architecture.(正常结构破坏）
- The bulk of the tissue being made up of *reactive lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells and eosinophils.*
- The malignant cell of Hodgkin's lymphoma forms only a **small percentage** of the cellular population within affected lymph nodes.
**Malignant cells of cHL:**
- Mononuclear Hodgkin's cells
- Mirror image cell 镜影细胞
- Reed-Sternberg cells
- Multiple R-S cell 多核瘤巨细胞
[](17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401.pdf#page=32&selection=0,0,0,48|17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401,%20页面%2032)
---
==Nodular sclerosis（ NS） (结节硬化型)==
- The commonest subtype of cHL (75% of cases).
- Distinct clinical differences –an almost equal sex ratio (most forms of HL show a marked male predominance)
- propensity for mediastinal (纵隔的) involvement at presentation (50% of patients)
- **Morphology**
	1. The normal lymph node architecture is replaced by cellular nodules which are *separated by bands of collagen.*
	2. Within the cellular nodules is a mixed infiltrate similar to other types of Hodgkin's lymphoma.
	3. A distinctive Hodgkin‘s cell variant termed the **lacunar cell（陷窝细胞）**. The lacunar cell is so named because it appears to sit in a space or 'lacuna‘.
==Mixed cellularity（MC）(混合细胞型)==
- The second commonest subtype of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma (18% of cases).
- The histological picture is an admixture of lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, **Hodgkin's cells and Reed-Sternberg cells.**
- Mixed cellularity is a rather aggressive form of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and a poor overall survival.
==Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin‘s lymphoma （LRCHL）(淋巴细胞为主型)==
- Characterised by the presence of characteristic H-RS cells in a lymphocyte-rich cellular background.
- **Nodular pattern**: predominantly of mantle zone B-lymphocytes
- **Diffuse** growth pattern: T-cell predominance
- There is a close morphological overlap between LRCHL and nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma(**NLPHL**).
==Lymphocyte depleted(淋巴细胞消减型)==
- Rare (<1% of all cases of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma)
- Carries the **worst prognosis**. Patients often present acutely with systemic symptoms, with a high frequency of involvement of liver (60% of patients) and bone marrow (40% of patients).


---
###### Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma (NLPHL)(结节性淋巴细胞为主型)

**Clinical features**
- HL 5%, Marked male predominance, over 80% of patients being men.
- The peak age incidence is a decade older for NLPHL than for patients with cHL; most patients are in their 30s and 40s.
- The majority of patients (nearly 90%) present with localized, asymptomatic disease.
- The lymphadenopathy occurs in unusual locations such as the suprahyoid neck（舌骨上颈部）and inguinal （腹股沟）regions, sites rarely involved by cHL. Mediastinal（纵隔的） disease is rare.
- **Late relapse远期复发** is common in NLPHL and may occur even after 20 years; the vast majority of relapses with cHL occur within 3 years.
- The overall survival of patients with N-LP is **excellent** and superior to that in cHL.
- Patients with NLPHL are at increased risk of developing secondary high- grade NHL (4% at 25 years), which is usually of B-cell lineage and may be clonally related to the original NLPHL .
**Morphology**
- A paucity缺乏 of typical Hodgkin's and Reed-Sternberg cells and abundant lymphocytes, sometimes admixed with histiocytes.
- There is a nodular growth pattern but occasionally diffuse areas may be present. **Collagen band formation is not a feature.**
- Distinctive Reed-Sternberg cell variant which is called the **‘popcorn’ cell（爆米花细胞）** because of its excessively lobulated nucleus.
---

| Subtype | Morphology and Immunophenotype                                                                        | Typical features                                                                  |
| ------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| NS      | Frequent **lacunar cells** and occasional diagnostic RS cells<br>RS cells CD15+, CD30+; usually EBV-  | most common subtypes                                                              |
| MC      | Frequent **mononucler** and diagnostic **RS cells**, plasma cells<br>CD15+, CD30+ 70% EBV+            | most present at stage III/IV<br>peaking in young adults<br>again in older than 55 |
| LR      | Frequent **mononuclear** and diagnostic **RS cells**<br>Lymphocytes, RS cells, CD15+, CD30+, 40% EBV- | uncommon; M>F<br>older adults                                                     |
| LD      | Reticular variant, Frequent diagnostic **RS cells**<br>RS cells CD15+, CD30+, most EBV+               | uncommon; older males                                                             |
| NLPHL   | Frequent L&H(**popcorn cell**) variants<br>RS cells CD20+ CD15- C30- EBV-                             | uncommon young males<br>excellent                                                 |

---
## NHL(Non-Hodgkin lymphoma非霍奇金淋巴瘤)

***Characteristics***
- 80% to 90% of all lymphomas are NHLs
- **Extranodal lymphoma** occupies about 1/3 of all NHLs.
- Histopathologic classification is more complex.
- Clinical manifestations are closely related to the sites involved
- *A spectrum from lymphomas to leukemias（白血病）*.

| B cell neoplasms                     | T and NK neoplasms                          |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| Precursor B cell neoplasms           | Precursor T cell neoplasms                  |
| Mature (peripheral) B cell neoplasms | Mature (peripheral) T and NK cell neoplasms |

######  1.1 Precursor lymphoid neoplasms 前体B细胞淋巴瘤
- Of precursor T-cell or B-cell lineage
- These tumors form the spectrum of disease termed **lymphoblastic lymphoma （淋巴母细胞性淋巴瘤）and lymphoblastic leukaemia（淋巴母细胞性白血病)**, and these appear to be biologically the same disease process.
- **Bone marrow** infiltration is frequent and a leukaemic phase is often seen in lymphoblastic lymphomas; this presents difficulties in separating **acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL，急性淋巴母细胞性白血病)** from lymphoblastic lymphoma.
- By convention, an arbitrary subdivision is made on the percentage of lymphoblasts present in the bone marrow (<25% is lymphoma; >25% is ALL).
- Express the **nuclear antigen TdT** (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase末端脱氧核苷酸转移酶, an enzyme involved in amplification of antigen receptor diversity), T cell and B cell differentiate antigen, e.g., CD10 etc.
- Approximately 90% of patients with ALL have numerical or structural changes in the chromosomes of the leukemic cells, e.g., hyperploidy, t(12;21), **t(9;22) (Philadelphia chromosome费城染色体)** and t(4;11) translocations.
###### 1.2 Peripheral non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (B)

1. ==Chronic lymphocytic leukemia / small lymphocytic lymphoma, CLL/SLL (慢性淋巴细胞性白血病/小淋巴细胞淋巴瘤）==
	- Tumors of immature small round lymphocytes-B-cell lineage.
	- In many it runs an indolent course with patients dying of unrelated causes
	- The disease is almost invariably disseminated, with a high frequency of splenic, liver and bone marrow infiltration.
	- Affected lymph nodes are **enlarged and usually smooth surfaced**, with a homogeneous **white cut surface.**
	- The normal nodal architecture is replaced by a **monotonous infiltrate of small lymphocytes** with scattered larger cells (called prolymphocytes， 前淋巴细胞) which may form aggregates termed **pseudofollicles.**

2. ==Follicular lymphoma, FL 滤泡性淋巴瘤==
	- One of the **commonest types** of NHL and *late adult life* with a peak age incidence in the sixth and seventh decades.
	- **Painless, slowly progressive** lymphadenopathy, usually with disseminated disease (stages III and IV); 40% of patients will have systemic symptoms.
	- Involvement of bone marrow, spleen and liver is common
	- Tumors derived from (or differentiated towards) **germinal centre B-cells.**
	- A specific chromosomal translocation involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain promoter region on chromosome 14 and the anti-apoptotic gene **bcl- 2 on chromosome 18** (t(14;18)(q32;q21)).
	- Follicular lymphoma is an indolent disease but it is generally regarded as **incurable when disseminated**, and the majority of patients die as a direct result of their lymphoma
	- At least 30% of patients the disease will transform into a **diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.** This lymphoma behaves aggressively and is usually refractory to treatment.

|     | Morphology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| --- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| G   | Lymph nodes replaced by follicular lymphoma are usually enlarged and smooth surfaced.<br>Cut surfaces are homogeneous grey/white with occasional areas of hemorrhage and necrosis.                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| M   | the normal lymph node architecture is replaced by closely packed **neoplastic follicles**, often extending through the lymph node capsule into perinodal fat<br>a mixture of **Centroblasts and centrocytes**; the relative proportion of these cells forms the basis of grading these lymphomas. Tumors with relatively large numbers of Centroblasts have a worse prognosis. |
[](17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401.pdf#page=66&selection=4,0,4,32|17%20CRBU1-淋巴造血系统疾病病理-毛峥嵘20250401,%20页面%2066)

3. ==Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, DLBCL==
	- the **commonest** type of **high-grade NHL**
	- Arise **de novo** or as a result of the transformation of a low-grade B-cell lymphoma (usually FL).
	- Usually a disease of **adults** but may occur in childhood.
	- With **rapidly progressive** nodal disease but extranodal involvement is common; involvement of the gastrointestinal tract and Waldeyer‘s（韦氏环， 口咽环） ring is most frequent.
	- A variety of cytogenetic abnormalities:
		- Translocations involving the **3q27 breakpoint** with **overexpression** and **mutations of the bcl-6 gene**, which associated with extranodal presentations and a more favourable clinical course.
		- **The t(14;18) translocation** resulting in deregulation of the **bcl-2 gene**
	- **M:** Characterized by a diffuse outgrowth of large **B-cells** which may display **centroblastic or immunoblastic cytology.*

4. ==Burkitt lymphoma, (BL)==
	- Three categories of Burkitt's lymphoma are recognized: **endemic, sporadic （散发性） and immunodeficiency-associated（免疫缺陷相关性）.**
	- Endemic Burkitt‘s lymphoma occurs in Africa and New Guinea（新几内亚） and occurs much less commonly in other regions.
	- The disease affects **children and adolescents,** is associated with **Epstein- Barr virus infection** and malaria（疟疾）, and involves extranodal sites, particularly the jaw（颌）, gastrointestinal tract and gonads（生殖腺）.
	- distinctive histological appearances ：
		- tightly packed **medium-sized lymphoid cells** interspersed with **phagocytic macrophages** which impart a **‘starry sky’ appearance (星空 现象)**
		- **A very high proliferation rate,** with almost 100% of cells being in cycle.**（ki67，增殖细胞的相关抗原）**
	- a specific chromosomal translocation involving the **c-myc gene at 8p24.**
---
###### 2.1 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified 外周T细胞淋巴瘤,非特殊类型
- To the presence of an endemic retrovirus, the **human T-cell leukaemia/ lymphoma virus (HTLV I),** which appears to be a causative agent in some forms of T-cell malignancy
- Most patients present with **generalized lymphadenopathy**, sometimes accompanied by eosinophilia, pruritus（ 搔痒）, fever, and weight loss.
- These tumors have a significantly **worse prognosis** than comparably **aggressive mature B-cell neoplasms.**
- A spectrum of **small, intermediate, and large lymphoid cells**, many with irregular nuclear contours
- All peripheral T-cell lymphomas have a mature T-cell phenotype, **lacking TdT** and usually expressing CD2, CD5, surface CD3, and either αβ or γδ T-cell receptors.

###### 2.2 Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type 结外NK/T细胞淋巴瘤，鼻型
- Most commonly presenting as a **destructive midline mass** involving the nasopharynx （鼻咽）, less commonly, the skin or other extranodal sites such as the testis（睾丸）
- The tumor cell infiltrate typically surrounds and **invades small vessels**, leading to **extensive ischemic necrosis.**
- Consist of either a mixture of small and large lymphoid cells or predominantly large lymphoid cells.
- Most tumors express **NK-cell markers, e.g., CD56**
- contain identical **EBV episomes（ 游离基因）**, a finding indicative of an origin from a single EBV-infected cell

###### 2.3 Mycosis fungoides, MF 蕈样霉菌病/Sezary 综合征

---
##### Clinicopathologic differences between HL and NHL

|               | HL                       | NHL                     |
| ------------- | ------------------------ | ----------------------- |
| Patient       | Children/young adults    | Any aged people         |
| Stage         | I / II                   | III / IV                |
| Symptoms      | 40%                      | 15%                     |
| Site          | LN, 90%;Neck/mediastinum | LN, 70%;Extranodal, 30% |
| Dissemination | Predictable              | Random                  |
| Extranodal    | uncommon                 | common                  |
| Leukemia      | No                       | Yes                     |
| Tumor cell    | R-S cells                | Lymphocytes             |
##### Some lymphomas with distinctive genetic abnormalities

| Types | Cytogenetic finding | Genetic alteration                                                   |
| ----- | ------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| FL    | t(14;18)(q32;q21)   | bcl-2 rearranged                                                     |
| MCL   | t(11;14)(q13;32)    | cyclin D1                                                            |
| BL    | t(8;14)(q24;q32)    | myc*                                                                 |
| DLBCL | t(14;18)(q32;q21)   | bcl-2 rearranged; <br>overexpression and mutations of the bcl-6 gene |

# Myeloid Neoplasms 髓系肿瘤（自学）

# Histiocytic and dendritic cell neoplasms 组织细胞和树突状细胞肿瘤（自学）

# Review questions

1. **Briefly describe histological features of specifically infection in lymph node , and give an example to explain.** 
	1. Granulomatous lymphadenitis  （结核结节）
	2. Necrotizing lymphadenitis （菊池病、猫抓病、传染性单核细胞增生症）

2. **Briefly describe the definition and histological features of different subtypes of Hodgkin lymphoma.** 
	1. Subtypes of HL:
		- cHL 经典型霍奇金淋巴瘤
			1. Nodular sclerosis, NS (结节硬化型)
			2. Lymphocyte rich, LR (淋巴细胞为主型)
			3. Mixed cellularity, MC (混合细胞型)
			4. Lymphocyte deplete, LD (淋巴细胞消减型)
		- NLPHL 结节性淋巴细胞为主型霍奇金淋巴瘤



3. **Briefly describe the classification of lymphoma and the histological features of common subtypes of non Hodgkin lymphoma, and give an example to explain.** 
	- subtypes: HL/NHL; cHL/NPPHL……





4. **How to distinguish the leukemoid reaction and leukemia?**
	- A ==leukemoid reaction== is **an increase in the white blood cell count, which can mimic leukemia**. The reaction is actually due to an infection or another disease and is not a sign of cancer.
	- ==Leukemia== is a type of **cancer** that affects the blood and bone marrow, characterized by the **abnormal production of white blood cells**.

5. **How to distinguish the follicular reaction and follicular lymphoma?**
	- ==Follicular reaction== can refer to several things, including **follicular conjunctivitis** (pink eye), **follicular eruptions due to drugs**, or the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, each with distinct characteristics and causes.
	- ==Follicular lymphoma (FL)== is a slow-growing, chronic blood cancer that affects **B lymphocytes**. It's the **most common type** of low-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma